Reorganize the Schema Cache information into a separate reference page (#404)
PostgREST/postgrest-docs: schema_cache.rst

.. _schema_cache:

Schema Cache
============

There are several PostgREST features that need information from the database schema.
If they accessed this information directly from the database every time they needed it, it would be too costly.
That is why, when PostgREST starts, it generates a database schema cache and uses it to get the information needed for these features:

- For :ref:`resource_embedding`, it looks for foreign key constraints to determine relationships between tables.
- For :ref:`s_procs`, it looks for their metadata: parameters, return type, volatility and `overloading <https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/xfunc-overload.html>`_.

> - For :ref:`upsert` statements, it looks for the tables' primary keys.

Reviewer: Hm, let's not refer to "statements" here (in pg there's no UPSERT statement)

```suggestion
- For :ref:`upsert`, it looks for the tables' primary keys.
```

> - For INSERT statements, it also looks for the tables' primary keys in order to return the Location header.

Reviewer: This one should link to https://postgrest--404.org.readthedocs.build/en/404/api.html#insertions-updates

> - For OPTION requests, it verifies the existence of tables and views and looks for INSTEAD OF triggers for the latter.

Reviewer: Just FYI, I've opened https://github.com/PostgREST/postgrest-docs/issues/406 since we have no OPTIONS section.

- For :ref:`open-api`, it looks for information about tables (columns, primary keys and foreign keys), views (columns and INSTEAD OF triggers) and stored procedures (metadata).

The Stale Schema Cache
----------------------

When you make a change in the database related to any of the features mentioned above while PostgREST is running, the schema cache turns stale. You then need to reload the schema before you make a request related to these changes, otherwise you'll receive an error instead of the expected response.

> 
> For instance, suppose you add a ``cities`` table to your database. This table has a foreign key ``country_id`` referencing an existing ``countries`` table. Then, you make a request to get the data from ``cities`` and their ``countries``:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Stale foreign key relationships
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For instance, suppose you add a ``cities`` table to your database. This table has a foreign key ``country_id`` referencing an existing ``countries`` table. Then, you make a request to get the data from ``cities`` and their ``countries``:
```

.. code-block:: http

  GET /cities?select=name,country:countries(id,name) HTTP/1.1

But instead, you get an error message that looks like this:

.. code-block:: json

  {
    "hint": "If a new foreign key between these entities was created in the database, try reloading the schema cache.",
    "message": "Could not find a relationship between cities and countries in the schema cache"
  }

As you can see, PostgREST couldn't find the relationship in the schema cache.

> 
> You get a similar result for stored procedures. Suppose you create this function on the database while PostgREST is running:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Stale function metadata
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You get a similar result for stored procedures. Suppose you create this function on the database while PostgREST is running:
```

Reviewer: Also, let's change "procedures" for "functions" everywhere in this page. We actually don't support pg 11 stored procedures([ref](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/11/sql-createprocedure.html)), so this could cause confusion.

Reviewer 2: Yes, fully agree with that one!

I think we also need to improve https://postgrest.org/en/latest/api.html#stored-procedures.

We should make it explicitly clear over there, that we don't support procedures, but functions - even when we name the concept a "remote procedure call - RPC". Not sure if we should use the term "stored procedures" at all, though.

Author: > Also, let's change "procedures" for "functions" everywhere in this page. We actually don't support pg 11 stored procedures(ref), so this could cause confusion.

Oh, I get it. But does this mean that the reference about [stored procedures](https://postgrest.org/en/v7.0.0/api.html#stored-procedures) should be renamed in the future?

Reviewer: > Oh, I get it. But does this mean that the reference about stored procedures should be renamed in the future?

Yeah, there's an issue related to that: https://github.com/PostgREST/postgrest-docs/issues/147. For now, we can use "function" instead of "procedure" on the schema cache page.

.. code-block:: plpgsql

  CREATE FUNCTION plus_one(num integer)
  RETURNS integer AS $$
   SELECT num + 1;
  $$ LANGUAGE SQL IMMUTABLE;

Then, you make this request:

.. code-block:: http

  GET /rpc/plus_one?num=1 HTTP/1.1

On a stale schema, PostgREST will assume :code:`text` as the default type for the function argument ``num``. Thus, the response you get is:

.. code-block:: json

 {
  "hint":"No function matches the given name and argument types. You might need to add explicit type casts.",
  "details":null,
  "code":"42883",
  "message":"function test.plus_one(num => text) does not exist"
 }

> To solve these kind of issues you only need to reload the schema and repeat the request.

Reviewer: I think we should remove "only". I've seen some articles(like this [one](https://www.knowledgeowl.com/home/dont-say-simply-jim-fisher)) that advice against mentioning that a task is "easy".

(We also had a similar case before, but I can't find it)

```suggestion
To solve these kind of issues you need to reload the schema and repeat the request.
```

> To solve these kind of issues you only need to reload the schema and repeat the request.

Reviewer: I think we should remove "only". I've seen some articles(like this [one](https://www.knowledgeowl.com/home/dont-say-simply-jim-fisher)) that advice against mentioning that a task is "easy".

(We had a complaint about this before, can't find the issue unfortunately)

```suggestion
To solve these kind of issues you need to reload the schema and repeat the request.
```

Author: Nice read! I agree.

.. _schema_cache:

Schema Cache
============

There are several PostgREST features that need information from the database schema.
If they accessed this information directly from the database every time they needed it, it would be too costly.
That is why, when PostgREST starts, it generates a database schema cache and uses it to get the information needed for these features:

- For :ref:`resource_embedding`, it looks for foreign key constraints to determine relationships between tables.
- For :ref:`Database Functions <s_procs>`, it looks for their metadata: parameters, return type, volatility and `overloading <https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/xfunc-overload.html>`_.
- For :ref:`Upserts <upsert>`, it looks for the tables' primary keys.
- For :ref:`insert_update`, it also looks for the tables' primary keys in order to return the Location header.
- For OPTIONS requests, it verifies the existence of tables and views and looks for INSTEAD OF triggers for the latter.

> - For :ref:`open-api`, it looks for information about tables (columns, primary keys and foreign keys), views (columns and INSTEAD OF triggers) and functions (metadata).

Reviewer: @laurenceisla Do you think this part would look better as a table? We might be able to reduce some repeated words by putting a column for "feature" and another column for "required metadata".

Author: I agree, it should make it look less cluttered.

Author: > ... and another column for "required metadata".

I used "required schema cache information" instead, I think that way it should include everything in the list, WDYT?

Reviewer: @laurenceisla The table looks much better!

Regarding "required schema cache information", I think "required metadata" is more precise since the metadata is not always in the cache, the schema cache might have to be reloaded to get it.

Author: > Regarding "required schema cache information", I think "required metadata" is more precise since the metadata is not always in the cache, the schema cache might have to be reloaded to get it.

Ah, I get it now. I agree.

The Stale Schema Cache
----------------------

When you make a change in the database related to any of the features mentioned above while PostgREST is running, the schema cache turns stale. You then need to reload the schema before you make a request related to these changes, otherwise you'll receive an error instead of the expected response.

For instance, let's see what would happen if you have a stale schema for foreign key relationships and function metadata:

Stale Foreign Key Relationships
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

    Suppose you add a ``cities`` table to your database. This table has a foreign key ``country_id`` referencing an existing ``countries`` table. Then, you make a request to get the data from ``cities`` and their ``countries``:

    .. code-block:: http

>       GET /cities?select=name,country:countries(id,name) HTTP/1.1

Reviewer: @laurenceisla This section is showing as indented. I don't think it should, it looks a bit weird. See https://postgrest--404.org.readthedocs.build/en/404/schema_cache.html#stale-foreign-key-relationships.

Author: True that, the indentation doesn't look good. It's fixed now.

    But instead, you get an error message that looks like this:

    .. code-block:: json

      {
        "hint": "If a new foreign key between these entities was created in the database, try reloading the schema cache.",
        "message": "Could not find a relationship between cities and countries in the schema cache"
      }

    As you can see, PostgREST couldn't find the relationship in the schema cache.

Stale Function Metadata
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

>     Suppose you create this function on the database while PostgREST is running:

Reviewer: Ditto for this one - indented.

.. _schema_cache:

Schema Cache
============

> Certain PostgREST features need information from the database schema; however, accessing the database directly would be too costly, that is why PostgREST generates a database schema cache on startup and gets the information from it instead:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PostgREST caches metadata from the database schema to avoid repeating expensive queries. This metadata is not required by all of the PostgREST features, only the following:
```

+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Feature                                    | Required Metadata                                                             |
+============================================+===============================================================================+
| :ref:`resource_embedding`                  | Foreign key constraints (to determine relationships between tables)           |
+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

> | :ref:`Database Functions <s_procs>`        | Function's metadata (parameters, return type, volatility and                  |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| :ref:`Database Functions <s_procs>`        | Function metadata: parameters, return type, volatility and                  |
```

|                                            | `overloading <https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/xfunc-overload.html>`_) |
+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| :ref:`Upserts <upsert>`                    | Primary keys                                                                  |
+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

> | :ref:`insert_update`                       | Primary keys (in order to return the Location header)                         |

Reviewer: Only insertions need the pk.
```suggestion
| :ref:`Insertions <insert_update>`                       | Primary keys (in order to return the Location header)                         |
```

Reviewer: @laurence Btw, the Location header is optional now(`return=headers`). Perhaps this need to be cleared here.

Reviewer: @laurenceisla Btw, the Location header is optional now(return=headers). Perhaps we should clear this here.

+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

> | :ref:`OPTIONS requests <options_requests>` | View primary key columns and INSTEAD OF TRIGGERS                              |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| :ref:`OPTIONS requests <options_requests>` | View's INSTEAD OF TRIGGERS and primary keys                         |
```

+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| :ref:`open-api`                            | Table columns, primary keys and foreign keys                                  |
+                                            +-------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
|                                            | View columns and INSTEAD OF TRIGGERS                                          |
+                                            +-------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

> |                                            | Function's metadata                                                           |

Reviewer: Ah, there used to be a mention about comments on these db objects right? I think we should add them again.

Author: Yes, but I took them away because comments don't depend on the schema cache. I explained it better [in this comment](https://github.com/PostgREST/postgrest-docs/pull/404#discussion_r647051537)

Reviewer: Oops, I forgot about that. Thanks.

+--------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

The Stale Schema Cache
----------------------

> When you make changes on the metadata mentioned above while PostgREST is running, the schema cache turns stale. Future requests that use the above features will need the :ref:`schema to be reloaded <schema_reloading>`; otherwise, you'll get an error instead of the expected result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you make changes on the metadata mentioned above, the schema cache will turn stale on a running PostgREST. Future requests that use the above features will need the :ref:`schema to be reloaded <schema_reloading>`; otherwise, you'll get an error instead of the expected result.
```

> When you make changes on the metadata mentioned above while PostgREST is running, the schema cache turns stale. Future requests you make related to these changes will need the :ref:`schema to be reloaded <schema_reloading>`; otherwise, you'll get an error instead of the expected result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you make changes on the metadata mentioned above while PostgREST is running, the schema cache turns stale. Future requests that use the above features will need the :ref:`schema to be reloaded <schema_reloading>`; otherwise, you'll get an error instead of the expected result.
```

For instance, let's see what would happen if you have a stale schema for foreign key relationships and function metadata:

Stale Foreign Key Relationships
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Suppose you add a ``cities`` table to your database. This table has a foreign key ``country_id`` referencing an existing ``countries`` table. Then, you make a request to get the data from ``cities`` and their ``countries``:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Suppose you add a ``cities`` table to your database. This table has a foreign key referencing an existing ``countries`` table. Then, you make a request to get the ``cities`` and their belonging ``countries``:
```

.. code-block:: http

  GET /cities?select=name,country:countries(id,name) HTTP/1.1

> But instead, you get an error message that looks like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But instead, you'll get an error message that looks like this:
```

Author: In this case, I think the sentence follows the present tense of the preceding one:

"Then, you make a request to get the ``cities`` and their belonging ``countries`` ... but instead, you get an error..."

.. code-block:: json

  {
    "hint": "If a new foreign key between these entities was created in the database, try reloading the schema cache.",
    "message": "Could not find a relationship between cities and countries in the schema cache"
  }

> As you can see, PostgREST couldn't find the relationship in the schema cache. See the section :ref:`schema_reloading` to solve this issue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you can see, PostgREST couldn't find the newly created foreign key in the schema cache. See the section :ref:`schema_reloading` to solve this issue.
```

> Stale Function Metadata

Reviewer: [Signature](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Signature/Function) might be a more precise term.
```suggestion
Stale Function Signature
```

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Suppose you create this function on the database while PostgREST is running:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Suppose you create the following function while PostgREST is running:
```

.. code-block:: plpgsql

  CREATE FUNCTION plus_one(num integer)
  RETURNS integer AS $$
   SELECT num + 1;
  $$ LANGUAGE SQL IMMUTABLE;

Then, you make this request:

.. code-block:: http

  GET /rpc/plus_one?num=1 HTTP/1.1

On a stale schema, PostgREST will assume :code:`text` as the default type for the function argument ``num``. Thus, the response you get is:

.. code-block:: json

 {
  "hint":"No function matches the given name and argument types. You might need to add explicit type casts.",
  "details":null,
  "code":"42883",
  "message":"function test.plus_one(num => text) does not exist"
 }

See the section :ref:`schema_reloading` to solve this issue.

.. _schema_reloading:

> Schema Reloading

Author: I think the link should stay that way because we've referenced it many times in answers to users' issues. I don't think it's that inaccurate as a reference name either.

> Schema Reloading

Reviewer: Yeah, you're right. Too late to change it. The name is not so bad, let's leave it like that.

.. _schema_cache:

Schema Cache
============

There are several PostgREST features that need information from the database schema.
If they accessed this information directly from the database every time they needed it, it would be too costly.
That is why, when PostgREST starts, it generates a database schema cache and uses it to get the information needed for these features:

+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

> | PostgREST Feature                   | Required Schema Cache Information                                             |

Reviewer: I think only "feature" should do:

```suggestion
|  Feature                   | Required Schema Cache Information                                             |
```

.. _schema_cache:

Schema Cache
============

Users are often confused by PostgREST's database schema cache. It is present because detecting foreign key relationships between tables (including how those relationships pass through views) is necessary, but costly. API requests consult the schema cache as part of :ref:`resource_embedding`. However if the schema changes while the server is running it results in a stale cache and leads to errors claiming that no relations are detected between tables.

.. important::

   Since v5.0, PostgREST also makes use of the schema cache for stored functions metadata: parameters, return type, volatility.

>    It also uses the schema cache for resolving overloaded functions. You should refresh the cache if a change in any of the prior is done.

Reviewer: I think this note should be merged with the above paragraph now. It's been a while since v5.0.

.. _schema_reloading:

Schema Reloading
----------------

To refresh the cache without restarting the PostgREST server, send the server process a SIGUSR1 signal:

.. code:: bash

  killall -SIGUSR1 postgrest

.. note::

   To refresh the cache in docker:

   .. code:: bash

     docker kill -s SIGUSR1 <container>

     # or in docker-compose
     docker-compose kill -s SIGUSR1 <service>

The above is the manual way to do it. To automate the schema reloads, use a database trigger like this:

.. code-block:: postgresql

  CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION public.notify_ddl_postgrest()
    RETURNS event_trigger
   LANGUAGE plpgsql
    AS $$
  BEGIN
    NOTIFY ddl_command_end;
  END;
  $$;

  CREATE EVENT TRIGGER ddl_postgrest ON ddl_command_end
     EXECUTE PROCEDURE public.notify_ddl_postgrest();

Then run the `pg_listen <https://github.com/begriffs/pg_listen>`_ utility to monitor for that event and send a SIGUSR1 when it occurs:

.. code-block:: bash

  pg_listen <db-uri> ddl_command_end $(which killall) -SIGUSR1 postgrest

> Now, whenever the structure of the database schema changes, PostgreSQL will notify the ``ddl_command_end`` channel, which will cause ``pg_listen`` to send PostgREST the signal to reload its cache. Note that pg_listen requires full path to the executable in the example above.

Reviewer 2: I don't think we need `pg_listen` anymore, but can `NOTIFY` postgrest directly now?

Author: Yes. There's another issue https://github.com/PostgREST/postgrest-docs/issues/335 for this part of the documentation, though. I'll make another PR for it.

.. _schema_cache:

Schema Cache
============

PostgREST uses the database schema cache to get information for several of its features:

> - For :ref:`resource_embedding`, it needs relationships' information, such as related tables, foreign keys, cardinalities, etc.

Reviewer: I think we should be precise here, so no "etc". Also "cardinalities" is more of an internal abstraction that's used in the code, so it shouldn't be included either.

```suggestion
- For :ref:`resource_embedding`, it looks for foreign keys constraints to determine relationships between tables or views.
```

Author: Agree, fixed the vague examples for this and the other comments.

> - For :ref:`s_procs`, it needs access to their metadata, for example, parameters, return type or volatility. It also needs to verify if the function is overloaded.

Reviewer: "For example" also sounds like lack of precision. So maybe like:

```suggestion
- For :ref:`s_procs`, it needs access to their metadata: parameters, return type, volatility, `overloading https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/xfunc-overload.html`_.

```

- To do an :ref:`upsert`, it looks for the primary keys.
- To do an INSERT, it also looks for the primary keys in order to return the Location header.

> - For OPTION requests, it verifies the existence and the data modification capabilities of a table or view.

Reviewer: Ditto for "data modification capabitilies". "instead of triggers" of the view would be more precise.

> - For :ref:`open-api`, it needs information about objects in the database (e.g., object description, columns and parameters).

Reviewer: Ditto for "e.g.":

```suggestion
- For :ref:`open-api`, it looks for `comments <https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-comment.html>`_ on the database objects.
```

"Database objects" could be further clarified. I don't recall precisely which objects comments we look for.

Author: Looking at [the code](https://github.com/PostgREST/postgrest/blob/1b12b112a1e491f51e48e37d5d828e4a390de26b/src/PostgREST/App.hs#L462-L469), the comments are accessed directly from the database. Tested it and there's no need to reload the schema cache to get the comments, but columns, PK, FK, INSTEAD OF triggers, and procedures metadata do need it.

> Retrieving this information directly from the database is costly, that is why PostgREST uses a database schema cache instead. When you change any of the information mentioned above while PostgREST is running, the schema cache turns stale. You then need to reload the schema before you make a request related to these changes, otherwise you'll receive an error instead of the expected response.
> 
> For instance, suppose you add a ``cities`` table to your database. This table has a foreign key ``country_id`` referencing an existing ``countries`` table. Then, you make a request to get the data from ``cities`` and their ``countries``:

Reviewer: For the stale schema cache case, we can add another subheading. That way we add some emphasis and we can link to the section.

I suggest to split the paragraph like this:

```suggestion
Retrieving this information directly from the database is costly, that is why PostgREST uses a database schema cache instead.

The stale schema cache
--------------------------------

When you change any of the information mentioned above while PostgREST is running, the schema cache turns stale. You then need to reload the schema before you make a request related to these changes, otherwise you'll receive an error instead of the expected response.
```

Reviewer: Also check the important note here: https://postgrest.org/en/latest/api.html#stored-procedures

The example with the function error should be here as well. That will no longer be true when https://github.com/PostgREST/postgrest/pull/1841 is merged, but for now it can be moved.
